---
layout: post
title: Keeping Instruments separated
date: 2020-01-20
author: jukka
---

# Keeping Instruments separated

## Introduction

SensorFleet Sensor can contain multiple Instruments. One of the primary
design goals for Sensor was to keep Instruments separated. This means
that while allowing the Instruments to interconnect with each other when
necessary, Instruments should not be able to interfere with each other
or with the Sensor platform itself.

Furthermore, Instruments should have as little access to network as is
necessary for them to function. For example, passive Instruments should
only be able to receive network traffic, they should not be able to send
any packets to the protected network.

Instruments should be able to store persistent data on Sensor platform,
but they should not be able to access data stored by other Instruments
or any data of the Sensor itself.

While isolated, the Instruments should still be able to provide user
interface or API endpoints using HTTP. These should be available through
Fleet Management UI.

In the next chapters we'll go through how this isolation has been
implemented in SensorFleet Sensor platform.

## Instruments within Sensor

The whole idea of having a common Sensor platform is to be able to run
multiple Instruments within same Sensor. These Instruments can do a
multiple different tasks from running a honeypot to hosting an IDS to
check internet traffic.

For Sensor operation it is vital to keep Instruments contained and not
allow them to interfere with each other or the Sensor itself. This way,
a malfunctioning Instrument can not bring down the whole platform and/or
other Instruments running on it. Also, if there is a security breach in
one of the Instruments, the attacker should be contained in the affected
Instrument and will not be able to cause harm to other Instruments or to
the platform.

### Containers

The primary way to separate Instruments is to run them in different
containers. SensorFleet platform uses `lxd`
(https://linuxcontainers.org/lxd/introduction/) containers, each
Instrument is run on its own lxd container. This will separate the
processes run for each instrument from other Instruments, while all are
still running on the same Operating System kernel. Containers are more
lightweight than virtual machines, while still providing the separation
for processes and network that is needed by the Sensor to securely run
multiple Instruments. Within Instrument containers we are running tasks
with as little privileges as possible to function.

When designing Instruments for SensorFleet use, we keep the Instruments
as simple as possible. For example, we use the `Alpine Linux`
(https://alpinelinux.org/) as base image for Instruments as it has a
small footprint and does not contain any unnecessary services running by
default. This allows us to build the Instruments to contain only
necessary components and will make it easier to verify the Instruments
operation.

### Network interfaces

Instruments have different kinds of networking requirements. Some
instruments, like IDS or Netflow need to be able to read network
traffic, but do not need to send data. This kind of instruments are
called passive and can be configured to have `mirror-bridge` network
interface which will only receive mirrored traffic from the actual
physical interface (see Helper Instruments for further information).
This will allow to keep passive Instruments from sending traffic to
(possibly critical network segments) they are monitoring in case of
malfunction or attacker getting access to the Instrument.

For Instruments requiring network access, like honeypot Instrument, user
can either dedicate physical network interface available on platform or
create bridged interface to physical interface shared with multiple
Instruments. This allows the user to control which network segments
Instruments have access to and the degree of access.

Further, if Instrument needs to periodically download resources from
remote location (IDS rules, for example), but does not need read-write
access to network otherwise, the Sensor platform provides dedicated
Instrument which can be used to download the resources (see Helper
Instruments for further details). This is done to allow instrument only
the minimum network access they really need for their core operation.

### Filesystems

Instruments normally need to store data during their operation. Sensor
platform provides instruments with two different filesystem stores,
transient and persistent. Neither of these filesystems can be accessed
by other instruments, disallowing other Instruments from reading the
possibly sensitive information stored. The filesystems are encrypted
[FIXME: elaborate] at rest.

Each instrument has its own time-based retention policy and is
responsible for deleting any data that is older than set retention
policy.
[FIXME: do we have quotas for persistent/transient storage so that one instrument
can not fill the disk for everybody else].

#### Transient data

Transient storage is initialized when Instrument is started and deleted
when Instrument is stopped or removed and, like the name suggests, can
be used by the Instrument to store runtime data that does not need to be
stored after Instrument is no longer running.

#### Persistent data

Persistent data can be used by the Instrument to store databases or any
other artifacts created by the Instrument operation. This data is kept
after instrument has stopped running. Each Instrument is required to
make sure persistent data does not contain data older than set by its
data retention policy.

### Instrument interconnections

Since Instruments can not connect with each other using network or
shared filesystem, the platform provides Instruments a communication bus
where they can either produce direct messages to each other or provide
events which other Instruments can act upon or augment further.

Using this message bus it is further possible to create manager
instruments which can operate, or command, other Instruments. One
example of this is to have Instrument which can create rules for IDS.
The IDS Instrument itself does not need to have all the application
logic or UI to allow creation of IDS rules, the Rule Manager
[FIXME: is this how we call it] can handle that and use the message bus
to send rulesets to the IDS.

#### Messages

Messages are either sent from the Sensor platform or other Instrument to
one Instrument to command or configure it. Messages are only seen by the
intended recipient and permissions can be configured to specifically
allow messaging between intended Instruments.

#### Events

Instruments can also provide events to indicate some action has
occurred. Some of these events are directly aimed for users (IDS alerts,
for example), but some events are aimed for other Instruments to trigger
some action.

For example, using DNS events produced by IDS instrument whenever name
resolution is detected in protected network allows Passive DNS
Instrument to collect passive DNS database without actually needing
access to network or do any of the complex DNS message parsing itself.

### Helper Instruments

Sensor provides some Instruments whose purpose is to provide operations
for other Instruments. These Instruments allow to reduce privileges from
Instruments doing network packet analysis or other parsing of
non-trusted data.

#### Downloader

Downloader Instrument can be configured to periodically download
resources from network. The download operation is isolated to single
Instrument which will need access to network. This network can then be
isolated from the actual protected network. Using downloader allows to
download IDS rule updates from providers periodically, but the actual
IDS Instrument or even the rule manager does not need to have write
access to network.

Furthermore, this also reduces code duplication since the download
functionality does not need to be implemented on all the Instruments.

Downloader instrument will download resources to its persistent storage
and then uses Sensor platform services to distribute the data to other
Instruments. This way, the downloader Instrument itself does not need
access to other Instruments filesystems making sure compromising
downloader still does not provide access data of other Instruments
running on platform.

#### Capco

Capco provides network packet access to passive Instruments. Any
Instrument doing packet analysis can be configured with a read-only
bridge interface to which Capco Instrument then mirrors packets from
actual physical interface connected to protected network.

Capco Instrument is designed to be efficient in copying and does not do
any packet analysis itself, reducing the attack surface as the packet
analysis is normally the crucial part and should be run with as low
priorities as possible.

### Instrument UI

Some instruments can provide their own UI or HTTP API for users. This
access is provided Sensor UI and can not be accessed directly through
other channels. All HTTP access is reverse proxied by Sensor UI and thus
can be access-controlled on Sensor if needed. This allows the Sensor
platform have a single point through which all user interfaces and APIs
are accessed.
